URL: https://www.britannica.com/Science-Tech
TITLE: Science & Tech | Britannica

Science & Tech | Britannica Search Britannica Click here to search Search Britannica Click here to search SUBSCRIBE SUBSCRIBE Login https://premium.britannica.com/premium-membership/?utm_source=premium&utm_medium=nav-login-box&utm_campaign=evergreen SUBSCRIBE Home History & Society Science & Tech Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture ProCon Money Games & Quizzes Videos On This Day One Good Fact Dictionary New Articles History & Society Lifestyles & Social Issues Philosophy & Religion Politics, Law & Government World History Science & Tech Health & Medicine Science Technology Biographies Browse Biographies Animals & Nature Birds, Reptiles & Other Vertebrates Environment Fossils & Geologic Time Insects & Other Invertebrates Mammals Plants Geography & Travel Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Entertainment & Pop Culture Literature Sports & Recreation Visual Arts Image Galleries Podcasts Summaries Top Questions Britannica Kids Ask the Chatbot Games & Quizzes History & Society Science & Tech Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture ProCon Money Videos Science & Tech How Do Black Holes Really Work? What is really going on inside of these terrifying faraway entities? LIGO/T. Pyle © Andrea Danti/Fotolia Are There Really Right-Brained and Left-Brained People? The notion that the right half of the brain is the creative half and the left half is the analytical half stubbornly endures. © Andrea Danti/Fotolia Popular The Difference Between a Solstice and Equinox 10 Important Dates in Pluto History Defy Gravity: 7 of the Biggest Things That Flew 6 of the World's Most Dangerous Birds Editor's Picks How Much Water Should a Person Drink in a Day? The popular recommendation to drink 8 cups of water every day isn’t as definitive as it may seem. The amount of water one should drink depends on a number of factors, including age, biological sex, and activity level. On average, women need to consume about 11 cups (2.7 liters) of water (the U.S. epistemology Epistemology, the philosophical study of the nature, origin, and limits of human knowledge. The term is derived from the Greek epistēmē (“knowledge”) and logos (“reason”), and accordingly the field is sometimes referred to as the theory of knowledge. Epistemology has a long history within Western How Fast Is the Universe Expanding? The rate at which the universe is expanding is called the Hubble constant, named after astronomer Edwin Hubble, who, with Milton Humason, showed convincingly that the velocity with which a galaxy was moving away from Earth was proportional to its distance. That is, velocity = Hubble constant × 6 Amazing Facts About Gravitational Waves and LIGO Nearly everything we know about the universe comes from electromagnetic radiation—that is, light. Astronomy began with visible light and then expanded to the rest of the electromagnetic spectrum. By using the spectrum, from the short wavelengths of gamma rays to the long wavelengths of radio waves, nanotechnology Nanotechnology, the manipulation and manufacture of materials and devices on the scale of atoms or small groups of atoms. The “nanoscale” is typically measured in nanometres, or billionths of a metre (nanos, the Greek word for “dwarf,” being the source of the prefix), and materials built at this 6 Questions About DNA Answered Deoxyribonucleic acid, better known as DNA, is crucial to life on Earth. The questions and answers in this list are taken from the Top Questions sections of the articles on DNA, recombinant DNA, and chloroplast, where you can find more questions answered. list, DNA, deoxyribonucleic acid, deepfake Deepfake, synthetic media, including images, videos, or audio, generated by artificial intelligence (AI) technology that portray something that does not exist in reality or events that have never occurred. The term deepfake combines deep, taken from AI deep-learning technology (a type of machine What Causes the Northern and Southern Lights? The auroras—the aurora borealis (or northern lights) in the Northern Hemisphere, and the aurora australis (the southern lights) in the Southern Hemisphere—are brilliant natural spectacles that can be seen in the evening sky especially at higher latitudes. Unlike other phenomena of the night sky, Spotlight: Mummification A team of scientists recently recreated the face of Peru's most famous mummy, "Juanita," or the "Ice Maiden." The girl is thought to have been sacrificed when she was between the ages of 13 and 15 some 500 years ago. Mummified by centuries of ice and snow, the body was well-preserved and is just one example of how mummification can occur naturally. Methods of Mummification 9 Noteworthy Bog Bodies (And What They Tell Us) The History of Embalming Quizzes Name That Magnified Object! Can you figure out what these common items are when they're extremely magnified? Guess the Body Part Quiz Taking this quiz requires guts. Name That Thing: Science Do you know the difference between a protractor and a compass? Guess the Animal Eyes Quiz Can you tell these creatures just by looking at their peepers? Videos Do different parts of the tongue taste different flavors? Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Do different parts of the tongue taste different flavors? Why being “blind as a bat” is a myth Why is blood red? How Volcanoes Work, Explained By a Volcanologist How are plant cells different from animal cells? Galleries 7 Wonders of the Natural World Meteorites Coral Life Tornadoes The Solar System Featured Categories Biology 6 Cell Organelles Think back to your high school biology class. Do you still remember the names and functions of all those little cell parts? A little foggy on the details, perhaps? Here’s a quick refresher course of some of the major eukaryotic organelles to keep your science skills sharp. It might come in handy How Does the Human Body Maintain Its Temperature? People are mammals, and mammals are warm-blooded creatures, capable of maintaining a relatively constant internal temperature regardless of the environmental temperature. Body temperature control is one example of homeostasis—an organism’s self-regulating process that tends to maintain internal 10 Ways of Looking at Cells Since 1665, when English physicist Robert Hooke coined the term cell to describe the microscopic view of cork, scientists have been developing increasingly sophisticated microscopy tools, enabling them to view ever-smaller details of cellular structure. Far from the poor-quality microscopes that 13 Questions About How the Human Body Works Answered How do people breathe in and out? What’s the body’s biggest organ? What causes a bruise? This list answers these questions and others about how the human body works. Earlier versions of these questions and answers first appeared in the second edition of The Handy Answer Book for Kids (and Parents) Astronomy 9 Ghostly Planets Humanity has sent probes to every planet, so we now have a decent idea of what’s in our neighborhood. Even before that, astronomers tracked the movements of the solar system for millennia. Sometimes their eyes (or brains) played tricks. Or did they? What ever happened to the ghost planets, those Why Are Planets Round? The Sun and all eight planets of the solar system are round. Why? The gravitational force of a planet’s mass pulls all of its material toward the center, smoothing out any jarring non-roundness. Many of the smaller bodies of the solar system are not round because their gravity is not enough to How Fast Is the Universe Expanding? The rate at which the universe is expanding is called the Hubble constant, named after astronomer Edwin Hubble, who, with Milton Humason, showed convincingly that the velocity with which a galaxy was moving away from Earth was proportional to its distance. That is, velocity = Hubble constant × Telescopes: Seeing Stars Recently the world’s largest single-dish radio telescope was completed in China. The Five-hundred-metre Aperture Spherical radio Telescope (FAST) is, as its name says, 500 meters (about 1,600 feet) across, which makes it 2.5 times larger than the previous largest single-dish radio telescope, the Mathematics al-Khwārizmī Al-Khwārizmī was a Muslim mathematician and astronomer whose major works introduced Hindu-Arabic numerals and the concepts of algebra into European mathematics. Latinized versions of his name and of his most famous book title live on in the terms algorithm and algebra. Al-Khwārizmī lived in Unusual Counting Systems In our everyday lives, we use a counting system in which we count from 1 to 10. That seems only logical because our hands are already in what is called base 10, which means the number 10 serves as the base of our number system. Each place in a number corresponds to a different power of 10. For Euclid Euclid was the most prominent mathematician of Greco-Roman antiquity, best known for his treatise on geometry, the Elements. Of Euclid’s life nothing is known except what the Greek philosopher Proclus (c. 410–485 ce) reports in his “summary” of famous Greek mathematicians. According to him, Euclid Aryabhata Aryabhata was an astronomer and the earliest Indian mathematician whose work and history are available to modern scholars. He is also known as Aryabhata I or Aryabhata the Elder to distinguish him from a 10th-century Indian mathematician of the same name. He flourished in Kusumapura—near Stay Connected Facebook X YouTube Instagram About Us & Legal Info Advertising Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Equal Opportunity Do Not Sell My Info ©2025 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.