URL: https://www.britannica.com
TITLE: Encyclopedia Britannica | Britannica

Encyclopedia Britannica | Britannica Explore Search Britannica Click here to search Search Britannica Click here to search SUBSCRIBE SUBSCRIBE Login https://premium.britannica.com/premium-membership/?utm_source=premium&utm_medium=nav-login-box&utm_campaign=evergreen SUBSCRIBE History & Society Science & Tech Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture ProCon Money Games & Quizzes Videos On This Day One Good Fact Dictionary New Articles History & Society Lifestyles & Social Issues Philosophy & Religion Politics, Law & Government World History Science & Tech Health & Medicine Science Technology Biographies Browse Biographies Animals & Nature Birds, Reptiles & Other Vertebrates Environment Fossils & Geologic Time Insects & Other Invertebrates Mammals Plants Geography & Travel Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Entertainment & Pop Culture Literature Sports & Recreation Visual Arts Image Galleries Podcasts Summaries Top Questions Britannica Kids Search Britannica Click here to search Ask the Chatbot Games & Quizzes History & Society Science & Tech Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture ProCon Money Videos Trending Frank Gehry Netflix 2026 World Cup U.S. and Venezuela Big Mac Index St. Nicholas Day Jane Austen Adaptations December 7, 2025 Suddenly and Deliberately This weekend marks “ a date which will live in infamy. ” On December 7, 1941, more than 2,300 U.S. military personnel were killed, more than 1,100 were wounded, and eight battleships were damaged or destroyed when the American naval base at Pearl Harbor was attacked by naval and air forces of the Empire of Japan . The surprise assault was the culmination of a decade of worsening relations between the United States and Japan, and precipitated America’s entry into World War II . Timeline: How the Attack on Pearl Harbor Unfolded Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. A Closer Look at the Pearl Harbor Attack U.S. Army Signal Corps/National Archives, Washington, D.C./Naval History and Heritage Command (USA C-5904) In Context: Pearl Harbor Was Part of a Broader Offensive That Day © KuntalSaha—iStock Editorial/Getty Images Discover More Quiz: How Much Do You Know About World War II? USS Arizona : The Construction, Sinking, and Legacy of a Battleship Concepts of Proof Ninety-two years ago this weekend, the Twenty-first Amendment was ratified, relegalizing alcoholic beverages in the United States after a 14-year dry period known as Prohibition . But the history of alcohol regulation has its own ambiguities—even when it comes to something as seemingly simple as determining an alcohol’s strength . Bullet proof Proof is one way of measuring a drink’s alcohol content. It started in the 16th century, when the English government would tax spirits that had a certain higher alcohol content. The English navy would test spirits by soaking a pellet of gunpowder in the liquor and trying to light it on fire. If it ignited, it was “proof” of higher alcohol content, and the spirit would receive the proof tax. This wasn’t the most scientific way to test alcohol content. When you light liquor on fire, you’re actually igniting the ethanol vapor it’s emitting, not the liquid itself. That means a spirit’s flammability is dependent on its temperature as well as alcohol content. Volume level In 1816 the British government decided to make the measurement more official. It defined “ proof ” liquor as having an alcohol level twelve-thirteenths the weight of the same amount of distilled water when resting at 51 °F. That’s about 48 percent alcohol by weight, or 57 percent alcohol by volume (ABV). Think rum, whiskey, brandy, or vodka. Other countries took a slightly simpler approach. In 1848 the United States defined “proof” as double the ABV, so a spirit with 50 percent ABV would be 100 proof. French translation France had taken it a step further. In 1824 scientist Joseph-Louis Gay-Lussac decided that 100 proof would equal 100 percent alcohol by volume , making proof the same as ABV. So, to compare the three systems, an alcohol with 45 percent ABV is about 78.7 proof in Great Britain, 90 proof in the U.S., and 45 proof in France. New on Britannica History of the AIDS crisis The AIDS crisis emerged in the early 1980s as a mysterious and terrifying disease. Do platypuses glow under UV light? The platypus is one of the strangest animals on Earth, even when illuminated. Manson family This cult and criminal organization was active in California, U.S., in the late 1960s, led by Charles Manson . When was Jesus born? No one really knows the year, or even the day, that the historical figure was born. Investing Trading Retirement Household Finance Finance & the Economy Companies 50-year mortgage: How it stacks up against 15- and 30-year loans Prediction markets: The intersection of forecasting and investing Emotional stages of retirement: The joy, the jolt, and the adjustment My stock is drifting down. Should I buy the dip? Popular ProCon Debate Topics A Current Affairs Program For Students & Nonstudents Wind Power Is Wind Power a Good Form of Energy? Vocabulary Quiz Sports Electric Vehicles Is It Good to Drive an Electric Vehicle? (Quick Take) Featured Games See All Quordle Can you solve four words at once? Reunion - NEW A daily word puzzle Revealed Uncover something interesting Tightrope A daily trivia game Blossom Pick the best words Octordle The party starts at eight Pilfer A delightful ruthless word game The Missing Letter A daily crossword with a twist Games Newsletter Get free tips, tricks, and teases in your inbox Twofer Goofer Think you know it, poet? Victordle Play head-to-head! Sudoku Your daily logic challenge Trending Quizzes See All Quizzes Where in America is That? Crisscross the U.S. by placing these famous landmarks. From Athena to Zeus: Basics of Greek Mythology Do you know which hero took a dip in the River Styx? Or what mysteries lurk inside the Labyrinth? Ultimate Animals Quiz What is a rattlesnake’s rattle made of? What animals can go over 180 miles an hour? Guess the Language! Quiz Can you recognize a language by its greeting? Best Picture Movie Quote Quiz Take this quiz or you may regret it. Maybe not today, maybe not tomorrow, but soon, and for the rest of your life. American Civil Rights Movement Quiz Test your knowledge of Americans’ tumultuous fight to end racial segregation and discrimination. Name That Thing: Tools A handy quiz to test your tool acumen. The Dog Breed Quiz Find out which breed can outrun a cheetah, which breed was created by monks, and much more. Baking and Baked Goods Quiz You may have a sweet tooth, but how much do you know about baking and baked goods? Test your knowledge with this quiz. First Ladies of the United States Quiz They have been hostesses, helpers, advisers, gatekeepers, guardians, confidantes, and sometimes formidable powers behind... Featured Videos See All Videos Timeline: Why Did Japan Attack Pearl Harbor? Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Timeline: Why Did Japan Attack Pearl Harbor? Roosevelt Reacts to the Pearl Harbor Attack: “A Date Which Will Live in Infamy” From the Archives: The Pearl Harbor Attack Before World War II: The Rise of Imperial Japan Britannica Premium Subscription Unlock Exclusive Content! Britannica's content is among the most trusted in the world. Subscribe to Britannica Premium and unlock our entire database of trusted content today. Subscribe Now! Explore Britannica History & Society How the Opioid Crisis Devastated Families and Communities How Women with Military Backgrounds Are Changing Politics Science & Tech How Do Black Holes Really Work? Are There Really Right-Brained and Left-Brained People? Biographies Deaths in 2025 Jimmy Cliff Animals & Nature Animals That Turn White in Winter 8 of the World's Most Famous Animals Geography & Travel Mini Monarchies: 6 Small Kingdoms Where Is "Old" Zealand? Arts & Culture 10 Must-Read Modern Poets Monty Python Calculators Mortgage Payment Calculator Estimate your monthly mortgage payments with our free mortgage calculator. Account for interest rates, compound
    frequency and pay back schedule. Compound Interest Calculator Compounding means getting returns on your previous returns plus your initial investment. Learn how to grow your
    savings with our compound interest calculator. Percentage Increase Calculator Calculate the increase from one value to another with our free percentage increase calculator. Evaluate population
    growth, inflation, stock values and more. Retirement Income Calculator Are you on track for retirement? Use our free retirement calculator to help determine how much you'll need to save
    each year to retire at your desired age. Time Value of Money (TVM) Calculator The time value of money (TVM) principle asserts that the same amount of money is worth more now than in the future.
    Use our TVM calculator to estimate future value, present value & more. More From Britannica ProCon Award-winning ProCon promotes critical thinking, education, and
                            informed citizenship by presenting the pro and con arguments to controversial issues in a
                            straightforward, nonpartisan, freely accessible way. Britannica Money Discover all you need to know about retirement, investing, and
                            household finance, without the jargon or agenda. Get reliable guidance, insight, and
                            easy-to-understand explanations, written, edited, and verified to Britannica’s exacting
                            standards. Advocacy for Animals Presenting Advocacy for Animals , a blog focused primarily
                            on animal rights, wildlife conservation, environmental health and safety, and the legal and
                            cultural issues related to these topics. This blog is a source of information and a call to
                            action. It is meant to be a provocation and a stimulus to thought regarding humanity’s
                            relationship with nonhuman animals. Alain Elkann Interviews Alain has been writing a weekly interview column for the Italian
                            newspaper La Stampa since 1989. His interviews celebrate some of the best known and
                            successful personalities of the present day. Our Sites Britannica Kids Merriam-Webster School & Library Melingo Britannica Books Escola Britannica English-Arabic Nglish Sp-En Translation Britannica Merch International Australia Brazil China India Japan Latin America United Kingdom Content & Editorial Encyclopaedia Britannica's Syndication API International Publishing Site Map New Articles Stay Connected Facebook X YouTube Instagram About Us & Legal Info Advertising Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Equal Opportunity Do Not Sell My Info ©2025 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.